.. _main_about:

*****
About
*****

.. toctree::
   :hidden:

   self
   about/privacy_policy
   about/docs
   about/contribute
   about/donate

.. toctree::
   :caption: Useful Links
   :hidden:

   Source Code <https://github.com/vkbo/novelWriter>
   Features & Issues <https://github.com/vkbo/novelWriter/issues>
   Discussions <https://github.com/vkbo/novelWriter/discussions>
   Translations <https://crowdin.com/project/novelwriter>

The idea to make novelWriter came about because most good software i could find for fiction writing
seemed to focus its development on Windows and MacOS. Even those that had once supported Linux, had
decided to drop the support.

As a Linux user for many years, this was very disappointing to me, so I started making my own
editor, the way I imagined I wanted it. At that time I had mostly fallen back on writing my novel
projects in LibreOffice Writer. While it is an excellent word processor that I still use often, it
lacked many features I was looking for. I wanted an editor where I could split everything up into
chapters or scenes, and move them about as I wanted. I also wanted to have all my notes in the same
place, and be able to cross-reference them in my text.

.. div:: sd-text-center sd-font-italic sd-text-primary

   Thus the idea for novelWriter was born.

It took me three attempts between 2016 and 2018 to get something I felt was heading in the right
direction. At the time, I was a PhD student at CERN, in Geneva, Switzerland. My first two attempts
at making an editor for fiction writing failed, so in 2018 when I started my post-doc at CERN, I
ran into a PhD student who also liked to write fiction in his spare time. He got interested in my
little project, so we spent many coffee and lunch breaks to sketch out the features we'd like to
see in a novel editor.

The programming was more my area, so I did that, while my colleague did a lot of testing and gave
me feedback on what did and didn't work. After a while, more people got interested in my project
and started providing feedback on my GitHub repository.

The rest is, as they say, history. More users brought more feedback, more ideas, more releases, and
an increasingly better text editor.

While the project is somewhat limited by early design choices in terms of framework and programming
language, it has been possible to grow and expand it. The scope of the editor has been deliberately
keep narrow over the years. It is after all an editor designed specifically for writing novels and
short fiction, and not anything else. This has made it possible to avoid feature bloat and keep
improving on what it is designed to do.

novelWriter is still under active development, and I personally use it for all my writing projects.
This is not likely to change any time soon. I hope you too find it useful, and my wish is that it
will help writers focus on writing in the future.

.. div:: sd-text-center sd-font-italic

   -- Veronica
